📖 ♻️ Update `Building a Bento AMP Component` Document (#35152)
ampproject/amphtml: docs/building-a-bento-amp-extension.md

In most cases you'll only create the required (req'd) files. If your element does not need custom CSS or JSS, you don't need to create those files.

### Versioning

AMP runtime is currently in v0 major version. Extensions versions are
maintained separately. If your changes to your non-experimental
extension makes breaking changes that are not backward compatible you

> should version your extension. This would usually be by creating a 0.2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
should release a new version of your extension. This would usually be by creating a [0.2 or 1.0](./spec/amp-versioning-policy.md#amp-extensions)
```

directory next to your 0.1.

When version 0.2 is under development, make sure that `latestVersion` is
set to 0.1 for both the 0.1 and 0.2 entries in `extensionBundles`. Once 0.2
is ready to be released, `latestVersion` can be changed to 0.2.

If your extension is still in experiments breaking changes usually are
fine so you can just update the same version.

> Note that Bento upgrades to existing AMP components should go by one major version, meaning it should create a 1.0 directory next to an existing 0.1 or 0.2.

Reviewer: nit: To maintain consistency with the rest of the document, please format sentences to a single line instead of manually wrapping them.

```javascript
exports.extensionBundles = [
...
  {
    "name": "amp-carousel",
    "version": "0.1",
    "latestVersion": "0.1",
    "options": {
      "hasCss": true
    }
  },
  {
    "name": "amp-kaltura-player",
    "version": "0.1",
    "latestVersion": "0.1",
  },
...
];
```

The entry for your component must have `options.wrapper = "bento"`. It may optionally include `options.npm = true` to publish the Preact component portion on npm automatically, following AMP's [release schedule](./release-schedule.md).

```diff
exports.extensionBundles = [
...
  {
    "name": "amp-my-element",
    "version": "1.0",
    "latestVersion": "1.0",
    "options": {
+     "npm": true,
+     "wrapper": "bento"
    }
  },
...
];
```

Note, if you are providing a version upgrade (pre-existing 0.1 to Bento 1.0, for example), it is important to note that the latest version is the 0.1 until the 1.0 version is no longer experimental and fully launched. The following is an example of two version entries for one component:

```diff
exports.extensionBundles = [
...
  {
    "name": "amp-my-element",
    "version": "0.1",

> +   "latestVersion": "0.1",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    "latestVersion": "0.1",
```

This should already be present

import {CSS} from '../../../build/amp-my-element-1.0.css';
// more ES2015-style import statements.

/** @const */
const EXPERIMENT = 'amp-my-element';

/** @const */
const TAG = 'amp-my-element';

class AmpMyElement extends BaseElement {
  /** @override */
  init() {
    // Perform any additional processing of prop values that are not
    // straightforward attribute passthroughs, as well as AMP-specific
    // work such as registering actions and events.
    this.registerApiAction('close', (api) => api.close());

    const processedProp = parseInt(element.getAttribute('data-binary'), 2);
    return dict({
      'processedProp': processedProp,
      'onClose': (event) => fireAmpEvent(event)}
    );
  }

  /** @override */
  isLayoutSupported(layout) {
    return layout == LAYOUT.FIXED;
  }
}

AMP.extension('amp-my-element', '1.0', (AMP) => {
  AMP.registerElement('amp-my-element', AmpMyElement, CSS);
});
```

The following shows the corresponding overall structure of your Preact base element implementation file (`extensions/amp-my-element/1.0/base-element.js`).

```js
import {MyElement} from './component'; // Preact component.

> import {PreactBaseElement} from '#preact/base-element'; // Preact component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import {PreactBaseElement} from '#preact/base-element'; // Custom element bridge to Preact.
```

export class BaseElement extends PreactBaseElement {}

BaseElement['Component'] = MyElement;            // Component definition.

BaseElement['props'] = {                         // Map DOM attributes and children to Preact Component props.
  'button': {selector: 'button', clone: true}    // All <button> children.
  'children': {passthrough: true}                // All remaining children excluding <button>s, which have already been distributed.
  'propName1': {attr: 'attr-name-1'},
  'propName2': {attr: 'attr-name-2', type: 'number'},
};
```

> Note: AMP Layout attributes like ‘layout’, ‘height’, ‘heights’, ‘width’, ‘media’, etc are not needed to be mapped as they will be intrinsically passed to the preact component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: AMP Layout attributes like ‘layout’, ‘height’, ‘heights’, ‘width’, ‘media’, etc are not needed to be mapped as they will be intrinsically passed to the Preact component.
```

AmpBaseCarousel['layoutSizeDefined'] = true;
```

### Register element with AMP

Once you have implemented your AMP element, you need to register it with
AMP; all AMP component extensions include the `amp-` prefix.

One way to specify the appropriate styles is to tell AMP which class to use for this tag name and which CSS to load.

```javascript
import {CSS} from '../../../build/amp-my-element-1.0.css';

AMP.extension('amp-my-element', '1.0', (AMP) => {
  AMP.registerElement('amp-my-element', AmpMyElement, CSS);
});
```

Alternatively, you may have defined styles via JSS that compile into CSS and attached via the shadow stylesheet. To tell AMP which class to use, override the `shadowCss` property:

```javascript
import {CSS} from './my-element.jss';

/** @override */
AmpMyElement['shadowCss'] = CSS;
```

## Validation, Testing and Experiment

### Allowing proper validation

> One of AMP's features is documentation validation checks to confirm it's valid AMP. When you implement your element, you must update the [AMP Validator](https://github.com/ampproject/amphtml/blob/main/validator/README.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of AMP's features is static validation on AMP document markup. When you implement your element, you must update the [AMP Validator](https://github.com/ampproject/amphtml/blob/main/validator/README.md)
```

to include rules for your element. Otherwise documents using your extended component become invalid. Create your own rules by following the directions at
[Contributing Component Validator Rules](https://github.com/ampproject/amphtml/blob/main/docs/component-validator-rules.md).

When converting an existing component to Bento with a version bump, it suffices to copy existing validator tests if applicable for APIs that stay stable between versions. When copying test files, be sure to change the version of the extension being imported.

In simple terms:

> 1. Modifying the spec in the `.protoascii` file, using satisfies and excludes to differentiate restrictiveness between `0.1` and `1.0` versions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Modify the spec in the `.protoascii` file, using satisfies and excludes to differentiate restrictiveness between `0.1` and `1.0` versions
```

> 2. Copying the existing `validator-amp-my-element.html` and `validator-amp-my-element.out` files from the `0.1/test` directory to the `1.0/test` directory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Copy the existing `validator-amp-my-element.html` and `validator-amp-my-element.out` files from the `0.1/test` directory to the `1.0/test` directory
```

> 3. Manually updating the script imported from the copied files to `1.0`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Manually update the script imported from the copied test files to `1.0`
```

In some cases, the validator rules for a `0.1` counterpart may allow for less strict usage of the component, such as with `requires_usage: EXEMPTED` or `deprecated_allow_duplicates: true`. The `1.0` version should reintroduce these restrictions by differentiating the versions via `satisfies` and `excludes`. [The validation PR for `amp-social-share`](https://github.com/ampproject/amphtml/pull/33478) serves as a useful reference and example for how to execute this change.

> For example, Bento `amp-soundcloud` .protoascii should be like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, changes to the Bento `amp-soundcloud` .protoascii should look as follows:
```

> ```protoascii

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```diff
```

Reviewer: I recommend making this code block a diff and adding `+` in the lines that are added (recommended in a suggestion below) to make it clear how the file is changing.

> tags: {  # amp-soundcloud 1.0
>   html_format: AMP
>   tag_name: "SCRIPT"
>   satisfies: "amp-soundcloud 1.0"
>   excludes: "amp-soundcloud 0.1"
>   extension_spec: {
>     name: "amp-soundcloud"
>     version_name: "v1.0"
>     version: "1.0"
>   }
>   attr_lists: "common-extension-attrs"
> }
> tags: {  # amp-soundcloud 0.1 and latest
>   html_format: AMP
>   tag_name: "SCRIPT"
>   satisfies: "amp-soundcloud 0.1"
>   excludes: "amp-soundcloud 1.0"
>   extension_spec: {
>     name: "amp-soundcloud"
>     version_name: "v0.1"
>     version: "0.1"
>     version: "latest"
>     requires_usage: EXEMPTED
>     deprecated_allow_duplicates: true
>   }
>   attr_lists: "common-extension-attrs"
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ tags: {  # amp-soundcloud 1.0
+   html_format: AMP
+   tag_name: "SCRIPT"
+   satisfies: "amp-soundcloud 1.0"
+   excludes: "amp-soundcloud 0.1"
+   extension_spec: {
+     name: "amp-soundcloud"
+     version_name: "v1.0"
+     version: "1.0"
+   }
+   attr_lists: "common-extension-attrs"
+ }
tags: {  # amp-soundcloud 0.1 and latest
  html_format: AMP
  tag_name: "SCRIPT"
+   satisfies: "amp-soundcloud 0.1"
+   excludes: "amp-soundcloud 1.0"
  extension_spec: {
    name: "amp-soundcloud"
+     version_name: "v0.1"
    version: "0.1"
    version: "latest"
    requires_usage: EXEMPTED
    deprecated_allow_duplicates: true
  }
  attr_lists: "common-extension-attrs"
}
```

$ amp prettify --local_changes
```

Use `--fix` with above commands to automatially fix common warning and error.

### Update YAML Metadata

Currently, Bento is in the experiment stage. So it is advised to include the following YAML metadata in the markdown:

```
bento: true
experimental: true
```

For example, Bento `amp-youtube` markdown should have YAML metadata as:

```diff
---
$category@: media
+ bento: true
+ experimental: true
formats:
  - websites
teaser:
  text: Displays a YouTube video.
---
```

### Code Ownership

> Developers are requested to provide code ownership for newely created components. Please read [Code Ownership and AMP](https://github.com/ampproject/amphtml/blob/main/docs/code-ownership.md) for detailed information. Refer discussion related to code ownersip on PR [#34948-discussion_r656779590](https://github.com/ampproject/amphtml/pull/34948#discussion_r656779590).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Developers are requested to provide code ownership for newly created components. Please read [Code Ownership and AMP](https://github.com/ampproject/amphtml/blob/main/docs/code-ownership.md) for detailed information. Refer discussion related to code ownership on PR [#34948-discussion_r656779590](https://github.com/ampproject/amphtml/pull/34948#discussion_r656779590).
```
